
Interval-Valued and Fuzzy-Valued Random
Variables: From Computing Sample Variances
to Computing Sample Covariances

Jan B. Beck1, Vladik Kreinovich1, and Berlin Wu2

1 University of Texas, El Paso TX 79968, USA, {janb,vladik}@cs.utep.edu
2 National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan berlin@math.nccu.edu.tw

Summary. Due to measurement uncertainty, often, instead of the actual values
xi of the measured quantities, we only know the intervals xi = [x˜i − ∆i, x˜i + ∆i],
where x˜i is the measured value and ∆i is the upper bound on the measurement error
(provided, e.g., by the manufacturer of the measuring instrument). These intervals
can be viewed as random intervals, i.e., as samples from the interval-valued random
variable. In such situations, instead of the exact value of the sample statistics such
as covariance Cx,y, we can only have an interval Cx,y of possible values of this
statistic. It is known that in general, computing such an interval Cx,y for Cx,y is
an NP-hard problem. In this paper, we describe an algorithm that computes this
range Cx,y for the case when the measurements are accurate enough – so that the
intervals corresponding to different measurements do not intersect much.

Introduction

Traditional statistics: brief reminder. In traditional statistics, we have i.i.d.
variables x1, . . . , xn, . . ., and we want to find statistics sn(x1, . . . , xn) that
would approximate the desired parameter of the corresponding probability
distribution. For example, if we want to estimate the mean E[x], we can take
the arithmetic average sn = (x1 + . . . + xn)/n. It is known that as n → ∞,
this statistic tends (with probability 1) to the desired mean: sn → E[x]. Simi-
larly, the sample variance tends to the actual variance, the sample covariance
between two different samples tends to the actual covariance C[x, y], etc.

Coarsening: a source of random sets. In traditional statistics, we implicitly
assume that the values xi are directly observable. In real life, due to (in-
evitable) measurement uncertainty, often, what we actually observe is a set
Si that contains the actual (unknown) value of xi. This phenomenon is called
coarsening; see, e.g., [3]. Due to coarsening, instead of the actual values xi,
all we know is the sets X1, . . . , Xn, . . . that are known the contain the actual
(un-observable) values xi: xi ∈ Xi.



2 Jan B. Beck, Vladik Kreinovich, and Berlin Wu

Statistics based on coarsening. The sets X1, . . . , Xn, . . . are i.i.d. random sets.
We want to find statistics of these random sets that would enable us to approx-
imate the desired parameters of the original distribution x. Here, a statistic
Sn(X1, . . . , Xn) transform n sets X1, . . . , Xn into a new set. We want this
statistic Sn(X1, . . . , Xn) to tend to a limit set L as n → ∞, and we want
this limit set L to contain the value of the desired parameter of the original
distribution.

For example, if we are interested in the mean E[x], then we can take
Sn = (X1 + . . . +Xn)/n (where the sum is the Mankowski – element-wise –
sum of the sets). It is possible to show that, under reasonable assumptions,
this statistic tends to a limit L, and that E[x] ∈ L. This limit can be viewed,
therefore, as a set-based average of the sets X1, . . . , Xn.

Important issue: computational complexity. There has been a lot of inter-
esting theoretical research on set-valued random variables and corresponding
statistics. In many cases, the corresponding statistics have been designed, and
their asymptotical properties have been proven; see, e.g., [2, 6] and references
therein.

In many such situations, the main obstacle on the way of practically using
these statistics is the fact that going from random numbers to random sets
drastically increases the computational complexity – hence, the running time
– of the required computations. It is therefore desirable to come up with new,
faster algorithms for computing such set-values heuristics.

What we are planning to do. In this paper, we design such faster algorithm
for a specific practical problem: the problem of data processing. As we will
show, in this problem, it is reasonable to restrict ourselves to random intervals
– an important specific case of random sets.

Practical Problem: Data Processing – From Computing to
Probabilities to Intervals

Why data processing? In many real-life situations, we are interested in the
value of a physical quantity y that is difficult or impossible to measure directly.
Examples of such quantities are the distance to a star and the amount of oil in
a given well. Since we cannot measure y directly, a natural idea is to measure
y indirectly. Specifically, we find some easier-to-measure quantities x1, . . . , xn
which are related to y by a known relation y = f(x1, . . . , xn). This relation
may be a simple functional transformation, or complex algorithm (e.g., for
the amount of oil, numerical solution to an inverse problem).

It is worth mentioning that in the vast majority of these cases, the function
f(x1, . . . , xn) that describes the dependence between physical quantities is
continuous.

Then, to estimate y, we first measure the values of the quantities x1, . . . , xn,
and then we use the results x˜1, . . . , x˜n of these measurements to to compute
an estimate y˜ for y as y˜ = f(x˜1, . . . , x˜n).



Interval-Valued Random Variables: How to Compute Sample Covariance 3

For example, to find the resistance R, we measure current I and voltage V ,
and then use the known relation R = V/I to estimate resistance as R˜ = V˜ /I˜.

Computing an estimate for y based on the results of direct measurements
is called data processing; data processing is the main reason why computers
were invented in the first place, and data processing is still one of the main
uses of computers as number crunching devices.

Comment. In this paper, for simplicity, we consider the case when the relation
between xi and y is known exactly; in some practical situations, we only known
an approximate relation between xi and y.

Why interval computations? From computing to probabilities to intervals.
Measurement are never 100% accurate, so in reality, the actual value xi of
i-th measured quantity can differ from the measurement result x˜i. Because of
these measurement errors ∆xi

def= x˜i−xi, the result y˜ = f(x˜1, . . . , x˜n) of data
processing is, in general, different from the actual value y = f(x1, . . . , xn) of
the desired quantity y [12].

It is desirable to describe the error ∆y def= y˜ − y of the result of data
processing. To do that, we must have some information about the errors of
direct measurements.

What do we know about the errors ∆xi of direct measurements? First,
the manufacturer of the measuring instrument must supply us with an up-
per bound ∆i on the measurement error. If no such upper bound is supplied,
this means that no accuracy is guaranteed, and the corresponding “measuring
instrument” is practically useless. In this case, once we performed a measure-
ment and got a measurement result x˜i, we know that the actual (unknown)
value xi of the measured quantity belongs to the interval xi = [xi, xi], where
xi = x˜i −∆i and xi = x˜i +∆i.

In many practical situations, we not only know the interval [−∆i,∆i] of
possible values of the measurement error; we also know the probability of
different values ∆xi within this interval. This knowledge underlies the tradi-
tional engineering approach to estimating the error of indirect measurement,
in which we assume that we know the probability distributions for measure-
ment errors ∆xi.

In practice, we can determine the desired probabilities of different val-
ues of ∆xi by comparing the results of measuring with this instrument with
the results of measuring the same quantity by a standard (much more accu-
rate) measuring instrument. Since the standard measuring instrument is much
more accurate than the one use, the difference between these two measure-
ment results is practically equal to the measurement error; thus, the empirical
distribution of this difference is close to the desired probability distribution
for measurement error. There are two cases, however, when this determination
is not done:

• First is the case of cutting-edge measurements, e.g., measurements in fun-
damental science. When a Hubble telescope detects the light from a distant



4 Jan B. Beck, Vladik Kreinovich, and Berlin Wu

galaxy, there is no “standard” (much more accurate) telescope floating
nearby that we can use to calibrate the Hubble: the Hubble telescope is
the best we have.

• The second case is the case of measurements on the shop floor. In this
case, in principle, every sensor can be thoroughly calibrated, but sensor
calibration is so costly – usually costing ten times more than the sensor
itself – that manufacturers rarely do it.

In both cases, we have no information about the probabilities of ∆xi; the only
information we have is the upper bound on the measurement error.

In this case, after we performed a measurement and got a measurement
result x˜i, the only information that we have about the actual value xi of the
measured quantity is that it belongs to the interval xi = [x˜i − ∆i, x˜i + ∆i].
In such situations, the only information that we have about the (unknown)
actual value of y = f(x1, . . . , xn) is that y belongs to the range y = [y, y] of
the function f over the box x1 × . . .× xn:

y = [y, y] = {f(x1, . . . , xn) |x1 ∈ x1, . . . , xn ∈ xn}.

For continuous functions f(x1, . . . , xn), this range is an interval. The process
of computing this interval range based on the input intervals xi is called
interval computations; see, e.g., [4].

Interval computations techniques: brief reminder. Historically the first method
for computing the enclosure for the range is the method which is sometimes
called “straightforward” interval computations. This method is based on the
fact that inside the computer, every algorithm consists of elementary opera-
tions (arithmetic operations, min, max, etc.). For each elementary operation
f(a, b), if we know the intervals a and b for a and b, we can compute the
exact range f(a,b). The corresponding formulas form the so-called interval
arithmetic. For example,

[a, a] + [b, b] = [a+ b, a+ b]; [a, a]− [b, b] = [a− b, a− b];

[a, a] · [b, b] = [min(a · b, a · b, a · b, a · b),max(a · b, a · b, a · b, a · b)].
In straightforward interval computations, we repeat the computations forming
the program f step-by-step, replacing each operation with real numbers by the
corresponding operation of interval arithmetic. It is known that, as a result,
we get an enclosure Y ⊇ y for the desired range.

In some cases, this enclosure is exact. In more complex cases (see examples
below), the enclosure has excess width.

There exist more sophisticated techniques for producing a narrower enclo-
sure, e.g., a centered form method. However, for each of these techniques, there
are cases when we get an excess width. Reason: as shown in [5], the problem
of computing the exact range is known to be NP-hard even for polynomial
functions f(x1, . . . , xn) (actually, even for quadratic functions f).



Interval-Valued Random Variables: How to Compute Sample Covariance 5

Comment. NP-hard means, crudely speaking, that no feasible algorithm
can compute the exact range of f(x1, . . . , xn) for all possible polynomials
f(x1, . . . , xn) and for all possible intervals x1, . . . ,xn.

What we are planning to do? In this paper, we analyze a specific interval
computations problem – when we use traditional statistical data processing
algorithms f(x1, . . . , xn) to process the results of direct measurements.

Error Estimation for Traditional Statistical Data Processing
Algorithms under Interval Uncertainty: Known Results

Formulation of the problem. When we have n results x1, . . . , xn of repeated
measurement of the same quantity (at different points, or at different moments
of time), traditional statistical approach usually starts with computing their
sample average Ex = (x1 + . . .+ xn)/n and their (sample) variance

Vx =
(x1 − Ex)2 + . . .+ (xn − Ex)2

n
(1)

(or, equivalently, the sample standard deviation σ =
√
V ). If, during each

measurement i, we measure the values xi and yi of two different quantities x
and y, then we also compute their (sample) covariance

Cx,y =
(x1 − Ex) · (yi − Ey) + . . .+ (xn − Ex) · (yn − Ey)

n
; (2)

see, e.g., [12].
As we have mentioned, in real life, we often do not know the exact values

of the quantities xi and yi, we only know the intervals xi of possible values of
xi and the intervals yi of possible values of yi. In such situations, for different
possible values xi ∈ xi and yi ∈ yi, we get different values of Ex, Ey, Vx, and
Cx,y. The question is: what are the intervals Ex, Vx, and Cx,y of possible
values of Ex, Vx, and Cx,y?

The practical importance of this question was emphasized, e.g., in [9, 10]
on the example of processing geophysical data.

Comment: the problem reformulated in terms of set-valued random variables.
Traditional statistical data processing means that we assume that the mea-
sured values xi and yi are samples of random variables, and based on these
samples, we are estimating the actual average, variance, and covariance.

Similarly, in case of interval uncertainty, we can say that the intervals
xi and yi coming from measurements are samples of interval-valued random
variables, and we are interested in estimating the actual (properly defined)
average, variance, and covariance of these interval-valued random variables.

Bounds on E. For Ex, the straightforward interval computations leads to the
exact range:

Ex =
x1 + . . .+ xn

n
, i.e., Ex =

x1 + . . .+ xn
n

, and Ex =
x1 + . . .+ xn

n
.



6 Jan B. Beck, Vladik Kreinovich, and Berlin Wu

For variance, the problem is difficult. For Vx, all known algorithms lead to
an excess width. Specifically, there exist feasible algorithms for computing V x
(see, e.g., [1]), but in general, the problem of computing V x is NP-hard [1].

It is also known that in some practically important cases, feasible algo-
rithms for computing V x are possible. One such practically useful case is
when the measurement accuracy is good enough so that we can tell that the
different measured values x˜i are indeed different – e.g., the corresponding in-
tervals xi do not intersect. In this case, there exists a quadratic-time algorithm
for computing V x; see, e.g., [1].

What about covariance? The only thing that we know is that in general, com-
puting covariance Cx,y is NP-hard [11].

In this paper, we show that (similarly to the case of variance), it is possible
to compute the interval covariance when the measurement are accurate enough
to enable us to distinguish between different measurement results (x˜i, y˜i).

Main Results

Theorem 1. There exists a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a list of n
pairwise disjoint boxes xi × yi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) (i.e., in which every two boxes
have an empty intersection), produces the exact range Cx,y for the covariance
Cx,y.

Theorem 2. For every integer K > 1, there exists a polynomial-time algo-
rithm that, given a list of n boxes xi × yi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) in which > K boxes
always have an empty intersection, produces the exact range Cx,y for the co-
variance Cx,y.

Proof. Since Cx,y is linear in xi, we have C−x,y = −Cx,y hence C−x,y =
−Cx,y, so C−x,y = −Cx,y. Because of this relation, it is sufficient to provide
an algorithm for computing Cx,y: we will then compute Cx,y as −C−x,y.

The function Cx,y is linear in each of its variables xi and yi. In general,
a linear function f(x) attains its minimum on an interval [x, x] at one of its
endpoints: at x if f is non-decreasing (∂f/∂x ≥ 0) and at x if f is non-
increasing (∂f/∂x ≤ 0). For Cx,y, we have ∂Cx,y/∂xi = (1/n) ·yi− (1/n) ·Ey,
so ∂Cx,y/∂xi ≥ 0 if and only if yi ≥ Ey. Thus, for each i, the values xmi and
ymi at which Cx,y attains its minimum satisfy the following four properties:

1. if xmi = xi, then y
m
i ≥ Ey; 2. if xmi = xi, then ymi ≤ Ey;

3. if ymi = yi, then x
m
i ≥ Ex; 4. if ymi = yi, then xmi ≤ Ex.

Let us show that if we know the vector E def= (Ex, Ey), and this vector is

outside the i-th box bi
def= xi×yi, then we can uniquely determine the values

xmi and y
m
i .

Indeed, the fact that E 6∈ bi means that either Ex 6∈ xi or Ey 6∈ yi.
Without losing generality, let us assume that Ex 6∈ xi, i.e., that either Ex < xi
or Ex > xi.



Interval-Valued Random Variables: How to Compute Sample Covariance 7

If Ex < xi, then, since xi ≤ xmi , we have Ex < xmi . Hence, according to
Property 4, we cannot have ymi = yi. Since the minimum is always attained
at one of the endpoints, we thus have ymi = yi. Now that we know the value
of ymi , we can use Properties 1 and 2:

if y
i
≥ Ey, then xmi = xi; if yi ≤ Ey, then xmi = xi.

Similarly, if Ex > xi, then ymi = yi, and:

if yi ≥ Ey, then xmi = xi; if yi ≤ Ey, then xmi = xi.
So, to compute Cx,y, we sort all 2n values xi, xi into a sequence

x(1) ≤ x(2) ≤ . . . ≤ x(2n), and we sort the 2n values yi, yi into a sequence
y(1) ≤ y(2) ≤ . . . ≤ y(2n). We thus get 2n× 2n “zones” zk,l def= [x(k), x(k+1)]×
[y(l), x(l+1)].

We know that the average E of the actual minimum values is attained
in one of these zones. If we assume that E ∈ zk,l, i.e., in particular, that
Ex ∈ [x(k), x(k+1)], then the condition xi ≥ Ex is guaranteed to be satisfied
if xi ≥ x(k+1). Thus, following the above arguments, we can find the values
(xmi , y

m
i ) for all the boxes bi that do not contain this zone:

yi ≤ y(l) yi ≤ y(l) ≤ y(l+1) ≤ yi y(l+1) ≤ yi
xi ≤ x(k) (xi, yi) (xi, yi) (xi, yi)

xi ≤ x(k) ≤ x(k+1) ≤ xi (xi, yi) ? (xi, yi)
x(k+1) ≤ xi (xi, yi) (xi, yi) (xi, yi)

As we can see, for each of O(n2) zones zk,l, the only case when we do not
know the corresponding values (xmi , y

m
i ) is when bi contains this zone. All

boxes bi with this property have a common intersection zk,l, thus, there can
be no more than K of them. For each of these ≤ K boxes bi, we try all 4
possible combinations of endpoints as the corresponding (xmi , y

m
i ).

Thus, for each of O(n2) zones, we must try ≤ 4K possible sequences of
pairs (xmi , y

m
i ). We compute each of these n-element sequences element-by-

element, so computing each sequence requires O(n) computational steps.
For each of these sequences, we check whether the averages Ex and Ey

are indeed within this zone, and if they are, we compute the correlation. The
smallest of the resulting correlations is the desired value Cx,y.

For each of O(n2) zones, we need O(n) steps, to the total of O(n2)×O(n) =
O(n3); computing the smallest of O(n2) values requires O(n2) more steps.
Thus, our algorithm computes Cx,y in O(n

3) steps. uunionsq
From Interval-Valued to Fuzzy-Valued Random Variables

Often, in addition (or instead) the guaranteed bounds, an expert can provide
bounds that contain xi with a certain degree of confidence. Often, we know
several such bounding intervals corresponding to different degrees of confi-
dence. Such a nested family of intervals is also called a fuzzy set, because it



8 Jan B. Beck, Vladik Kreinovich, and Berlin Wu

turns out to be equivalent to a more traditional definition of fuzzy set [7, 8] (if
a traditional fuzzy set is given, then different intervals from the nested family
can be viewed as α-cuts corresponding to different levels of uncertainty α).

To provide statistical values of fuzzy-valued random variables, we can
therefore, for each level α, apply the above interval-valued techniques to the
corresponding α-cuts.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by NASA grant NCC5-209,
by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research grant F49620-00-1-0365, by
NSF grants EAR-0112968, EAR-0225670, and EIA-0321328, and by the Army
Research Laboratories grant DATM-05-02-C-0046. The authors are thankful
to Hung T. Nguyen and to the anonymous referees for valuable suggestions.

References

1. Ferson S, Ginzburg L, Kreinovich V, Longpre´ L, Aviles M (2002) Computing
Variance for Interval Data is NP-Hard, ACM SIGACT News 33(2):108–118.

2. Goutsias J, Mahler RPS, Nguyen HT, eds. (1997) Random Sets: Theory and
Applications. Springer-Verlag, N.Y.

3. Heitjan DF, Rubin DB (1991) Ignorability and coarse data, Ann. Stat.
19(4):2244–2253

4. Jaulin L, Kieffer M, Didrit O, and Walter E (2001) Applied Interval Analysis.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin

5. Kreinovich V, Lakeyev A, Rohn J, Kahl P (1997) Computational Complexity
and Feasibility of Data Processing and Interval Computations. Kluwer, Dor-
drecht

6. Li S, Ogura Y, Kreinovich V (2002) Limit Theorems and Applications of Set
Valued and Fuzzy Valued Random Variables. Kluwer, Dordrecht

7. Nguyen HT, Kreinovich V (1996) Nested Intervals and Sets: Concepts, Relations
to Fuzzy Sets, and Applications, In: Kearfott RB et al., Applications of Interval
Computations, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 245–290

8. Nguyen HT, Walker EA (1999) First Course in Fuzzy Logic, CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida

9. Nivlet P, Fournier F, and Royer J. (2001) A new methodology to account for
uncertainties in 4-D seismic interpretation, Proc. 71st Annual Int’l Meeting of
Soc. of Exploratory Geophysics SEG’2001, San Antonio, TX, September 9–14,
1644–1647.

10. Nivlet P, Fournier F, Royer J (2001) Propagating interval uncertainties in su-
pervised pattern recognition for reservoir characterization, Proc. 2001 Society
of Petroleum Engineers Annual Conf. SPE’2001, New Orleans, LA, September
30–October 3, paper SPE-71327.

11. Osegueda R, Kreinovich V, Potluri L, Alo´ R (2002) Non-Destructive Testing of
Aerospace Structures: Granularity and Data Mining Approach. In: Proc. FUZZ-
IEEE’2002, Honolulu, HI, May 12–17, 2002, Vol. 1, 685–689

12. Rabinovich S (1993) Measurement Errors: Theory and Practice. American In-
stitute of Physics, New York


